Welcome to the June program of J.W. Broadcasting.
As you likely remember, Gilead graduations are now featured as the monthly J.W. Broadcasting program once every six months.
For this program, we're excited to share with you the first part of the graduation of the 144th Class of Gilead,
which took place on March 10, 2018.
This program features scriptural talks within intriguing themes.
We know you'll enjoy these thought-provoking discussions.
In coming weeks, be on the lookout for parts two and three of the Gilead graduation.
You'll have an opportunity to get to know some of the students better during another heart stirring episode of The Inside Story.
But now, we invite you to enjoy part one of the graduation of the 144th Class of Gilead.
You'll see a picture on the monitors.
Take a look at it.
Take a good look.
What's the occasion?
I'll give you a hint.
The picture was taken 75 years ago last month.
It's a picture of the very first day of the very first Class of Gilead.
So 75 years ago last month was the inception of Gilead.
Now, Gilead, that's an interesting word, isn't it?
What does it mean?
Well, if you answer heap of witness, it shows that you're very familiar with the 1984 edition of the New World Translation.
The 2013 edition says, witness pile.
Now, there can be a difference between a heap and a pile, where I come from in Canada in the winter time and gets very cold.
And to save on heating expenses, many families heat with a wood stove.
So you go to the backyard and you see a very neat pile of wood stacked up.
They're not careless about it.
In fact, some of them are quite meticulous about their wood pile.
If you appreciate the appearance of your home, some of them are very artistic, almost sculpted these wood piles.
And we'll never call it a heap because a heap you'd think of wood that just being carelessly strewn right and left.
But no, this is a wood pile. So something rather neat.
So why are we talking about a witness pile?
Well, what was it? What was this heap of witness? What was this witness pile in the original meaning?
What purpose did it serve?
And why does it concern you members of the graduating class? It does.
In fact, it concerns all of us. There's a lesson that all of us can learn from this witness pile called Gilead.
Let's go to the origin.
Back in Genesis chapter 31, Genesis chapter 31.
Now a little context. The patriarch Jacob was tired of being cheated by his father-in-law, Laban.
And as we read the scriptures, we know that Laban was kind of a shady character.
You wouldn't want to buy a used car from Laban.
And so Jacob got tired of being cheated and so he ran away with his wives and his children.
Well, Laban ran after him. And when he caught up with Jacob, Laban and Jacob made a covenant of peace.
Now we take up the reading from verse 43. So this is Genesis 31 beginning with verse 43.
Then Laban answered Jacob,
The daughters are my daughters and the children my children and the flock my flock and everything you are looking at is mine.
It tells you what kind of a person he was, doesn't it? Verse 44.
Now come. Let us make a covenant you and I and it will serve as a witness between us.
So Jacob took a stone and set it up as a pillar. Then Jacob said to his brothers, pick up stones.
And they took stones and made a pile. And notice this, after that they ate there on the pile of stones.
So scholars tell us that this pile of stones must have been quite neatly arranged so that it would form a kind of a table.
And they had their meal of peace on this table. And of course this was to serve as a monument.
It was to be a monument of the covenant of peace between Laban and Jacob.
Now let us carry on. Verse 47.
And Laban began calling it jigar say hiduta. But Jacob called it gallaeid.
When the brothers were picking a name for the school, aren't you glad they didn't go with Laban?
How would you students like to be graduates of the Watchtower Bible School of jigar dhalehuta? That would be a mouthful, wouldn't it?
So they chose gallaeid or gileid. Verse 48 and 49. Laban then said,
this pile of stones is a witness between me and you today. That is why he named it gallaeid and the Watchtower.
And isn't it interesting that both Watchtower and gileid are in the name of our school?
Now what was the purpose of the pile of rocks? Verse 52.
This pile of stones is a witness. And the pillar is something that bears witness that I will not pass beyond this pile of stones to bring harm to you.
And you will not pass beyond this pile of stones and this pillar to bring harm to me.
So this gileid, this pile of stones, this witness pile, was really a monument.
It was a symbol of peace and unity. And anytime someone would pass by that monument, that pile of stones, that witness heap, if you like.
They would be reminded of the need for unity.
Now the unity between Laban and Jacob didn't come about automatically.
We read verse 43, did you notice the accusations that Laban made when he first encountered Jacob?
The daughters are mine. The children are mine. The flocks are mine.
Everything you see is mine. Well, then we're fighting words.
Jacob had worked very hard for everything he got. He'd worked for 14 years for his wives. And Laban changed his wages 10 times.
So Laban had no right to say that it was all his. And Jacob could have taken exception to it, but he bit his tongue. Why? The goal was peace.
He wanted to make peace. So Jacob took the high road.
Well, today, that name gileid is an appropriate name for our school. And it reminds us of the blessed unity that must prevail through the organization today.
When you think of it, gileid has been a tremendous force to unify God's people. As missionaries were sent to the four corners of our corners of the earth, they were supplicating people to come into a peaceful relationship with your Hove of God.
And as branches were formed, the missionaries understood how world headquarters worked. And they helped to promote unity between the branches and world headquarters.
So the missionaries were agents of peace. And now, of course, the focus of gileid is on strengthening the congregations, strengthening the circuits, strengthening the branches for forging an unbreakable link between the branches and world headquarters.
And gileid plays a part in all this. We are one flock under one shepherd. Don't hurt any member of the flock. Be a peacemaker.
If you want peace, you have to work for it. And sometimes to achieve it, we have to bite our tongues.
That was not a good lesson that you members of the graduating class can learn and all of us, because we all want to work for the peace of Jerusalem. We all want to work for the peace of Jehovah's organization.
Well, back to the first class of gileid.
Graduation day, June 23rd, 1943. Wait a minute. First day of class, February 1. Graduation day, June 23rd. That wasn't five months, wasn't.
But they had a lovely graduation day. And the first to speak was a member of what would later become the governing body, Brother W.E. Van Ambre.
Well, today at the graduation of the 144th class, we have a member of the governing body who will be first to speak, not Brother Van Ambre, but Brother Anthony Morris.
And Tony is going to speak to us on the subject, supplicate all the time.
You soon to be graduates are very familiar with the fact that in scripture, there's different forms of prayer.
You have petition. We petition Jehovah for various needs. You have Thanksgiving so much to thank him for. And then, of course, Jehovah always deserves praise, so we'll have these prayers we offer to praise him.
However, I just want to implant in your minds as you get ready to graduate and go to your assignments, this matter of supplication that's unique.
It's just full of emotion, earnest prayer. And I think you understand that much to understand why we're suggesting you should supplicate all the time, all the time.
And take for example, Christ Jesus said the perfect example for us here. And you'll notice in Hebrews chapter five.
And how priceless his perfect example was, at least we try to reach for it.
But not just you soon to be graduates, but all of us can benefit from this good council.
He was, he was chapter five in verse seven.
During his life on earth, Christ offered up supplications and also petitions with strong outcries and tears to the one who was able to save him out of death.
And he was favorably heard for his godly fear.
You'll notice though the supplications plural.
So certainly he's supplicated throughout his three and a half year ministry of it and only imagine the final weeks, days, hours, the tears, the supplication.
So this is the example for us. And the closer we get to the end, Jehovah wants us to imitate his son.
In fact, Jesus made it very clear how important this is and you're aware of it, but sometimes we get so busy with the things we're dealing with we can forget that notice what he commanded Luke.
So find Luke.
Now we're going to look at the 21st chapter. You'll quickly remember it.
Luke chapter 21.
Now here just to highlight a little bit before we read verse 36, you'll notice a verse 34.
These are the things we have to pay attention to to avoid being weighed down with over reading and heavy drinking and anxieties of life.
So it doesn't hit us like a snare.
Now notice verse 36, keep awake then all the time, making supplication that you may succeed in escaping all these things that must occur and in standing before the son of man.
So this is what he said all the time, making supplication.
So obviously it's not going to be something if you're driving a car or you're going to stop and start supplicating on the road, but the spirit of his counsel is that you want to succeed.
Like I succeeded, you must supplicate all the time. It just has to be you can't let a day go by where you haven't had supplication.
The closer we get to the end, the more important that is.
A lot of us need to focus on supplicating because it's not what might occur.
It's what will occur.
See, this is a reality.
So it's very obvious and it's understandable that we will supplicate when we are a loved one faces a crisis, something happens.
And then it's just natural to get that intense emotion in the prayer and there could well be tears, but it's intense.
It's just focused, just gripping you with the emotion as we face different things.
So that someone you may have a life threatening illness in the future, you'll start supplicating with that news.
You have a loved one, their life is threatened, there's going to be supplication, but just even though that's appropriate and Jehovah expects us to do that there.
Have you take back with your on your assignments, something that you must supplicate about too.
And I have to take the same counsel. It means a lot to Jehovah.
Very basic, but look at Matthew chapter 6.
Matthew chapter 6.
And this is where Jesus gave the example of prayer and it certainly extends to supplicating.
You'll notice in verse 9 where he mentioned you must pray this way.
Our Father in the heavens let your name be sanctified. Let your kingdom come.
Let your will take place as in heaven, also on earth.
So Jehovah's name.
You look at this wicked world.
It's getting worse, the Bible foretolder, from bad to worse.
And it's just so reproachful to the holy name of God.
Everybody is in the face of anything scriptural, and how terrible that is.
Supplicating about your concern to Jehovah himself, how that bothers you, that'll touch him.
And it's nice because it gets your mind off yourself, which is not always spiritually healthy.
Focus on Jehovah's name because it's his name and the kingdom that's going to rid the whole world of all the problems anyway.
So it's just something much to take with you to supplicate about Jehovah's name and removing the reproach and that his kingdom come.
Do that often all the time, if you will.
Now, just some final thoughts here and very familiar, Psalm, Psalm 83.
So if you'll find some 83 here.
And this connects with supplicating Jehovah to have his will done and his name to be vindicated.
We say in English as well now, clear to the reproach.
You feel the same way I do it. I'm way over here.
It's disgusting.
You got to keep up with some of the news, but it's almost like, let me stop.
But you got to know a little something that's going on.
And we have connection with our brothers from all different parts of the earth,
things coming up all the time.
So much to supplicate about and the kingdom's going to finally put it into all of it.
Now, what I thought to appreciate, you look at the 83rd Psalm.
Now, in context, the first five verses, this is interesting.
It's about those who hate Jehovah.
These arrogant enemies of Jehovah God hate him and hate his people.
They're cunning. They're despicable.
Now, it's quite fascinating that in verse five, see the B part of the verse,
they have made an alliance against you.
So this was an alliance of nations coming against Jehovah's name people.
See an alliance.
What's every mind job?
So by focusing on supplicating all the time,
you're really getting yourself ready for the great tribulation.
Because we call it a coalition of nations,
like Gog's attack, see, connects with what we see here happened in the past.
And these beautiful thoughts here, notice verse 17 and verse 18 of the 83rd Psalm.
And this is from our hearts.
We want to supplicate this to our Father.
May they be put to shame and be terrified forever.
May they be disgraced and perish.
May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah,
you alone are the most high over all the earth.
What a stirring supplication, see.
So with whatever you face, you soon to be graduates in the future.
Remember the scriptural advice.
Supplicate all the time and you're sure to succeed.
Beautifully done.
Thank you very much, brother Morris.
Now at the graduation of the first class of Gilead,
the next to speak was a responsible brother.
And we have a responsible brother who is going to speak to us next.
Brother Herman Vanselm, he's a helper with the writing committee.
And brother Vanselm is going to speak to us on the interesting theme,
see and be Jehovah's hand.
Think for a moment of your congregation back home.
Imagine that Jehovah observed there a dear elderly sister
who has suffered one painful setback after another.
As a result, she is heartbroken.
She even feels that Jehovah doesn't love her anymore.
But then through the working of his spirit,
Jehovah makes you aware of her situation.
You want to help the dear sister, but you wonder,
can I show her that Jehovah is still reaching out to her?
How can I help her to see Jehovah's supporting hand at work in her life?
To answer, let us consider a few verses in the Bible book of Ruth,
which relates the touching story of Naomi, Ruth, and Boas.
As we remember, Naomi's husband died.
Then her two sons got married, but sadly, both of them also died.
Those blows caused Naomi to sing deeper and deeper into despair.
She even felt that Jehovah had abandoned her.
Note in chapter 1, verse 13, at the end of the verse, what Naomi said.
The hand of Jehovah has turned against me.
Verse 20, at the end of the verse,
the Almighty has made my life very bitter for me.
Verse 21, at the end of the verse,
Jehovah who opposed me and the Almighty who caused me calamity.
Now, these were strong statements, but of course none of them were true.
Jehovah had not turned against her.
Jehovah had not caused her calamity.
So how did Jehovah react to Naomi's bitter words?
Well, he did not send fire from heaven to punish her.
He did not send a prophet to reproof her.
Instead, he used Ruth and Boas to reach out to Naomi
and pull her gently out of her despair.
In a sense, Jehovah gave Ruth and Boas the privilege to serve as his hand.
That is the means through which he would provide support to Naomi.
In this class, we have 22 Ruth like sisters and 27 Boas like brothers.
Also, there are thousands of Ruth and Boas in this audience.
So how can we be Jehovah's hand and how can we help the Naomi's in our congregation
to see Jehovah's hand at work in their life?
To answer, we will consider five steps mentioned in the book of Ruth
that we could follow to help our fellow worshipers who are in need.
Step number one, have the right motivation.
Since helping those in need takes great effort, we have to be motivated by love
but it needs to be a special kind of love.
What do we mean?
Well, love is a bit like coffee.
Coffee? In what way?
Well, coffee comes in different types.
It says cappuccino, caffé latte, caffé mocha.
Similarly, love comes in different types.
It says love for family, brotherly love, principled love.
But the love, considered in the book of Ruth, is yet of a different type.
What is it? It is mentioned in chapter 1, verse 8.
Naomi said to both of her daughters-in-law,
go, return, each of you to your mother's home,
made Jehovah's show loyal love to you,
just as you have shown it to the man who had died and to me.
Loyal love.
What kind of love is that?
It's a very strong kind of love.
It's a bit like a double espresso undiluted.
It gives you a real boost that helps you to attach yourself to a brother in need
and to cling to him until you have pulled him out of his despair.
Now, that's the type of love we show to our brothers and sisters in need.
Step number two.
Be persistent.
When Ruth offered her helping hand to Naomi,
first refused to accept it.
But Ruth motivated by Loyal love did not take no for an answer.
What was the result?
Chapter 1, verse 18.
When Naomi saw that Ruth insisted on going with her,
she stopped trying to convince her.
Similarly today,
a sister in despair may first refuse to accept our help,
even so Loyal love will move us to cling to that sister,
hoping that she will eventually accept our hand of friendship.
Step number three.
Don't take it personally.
When Naomi and Ruth arrived in Bethlehem,
Naomi met her former neighbors.
What did she tell them?
Chapter 1, verse 21.
I was full when I went,
but Jehovah made me return empty handed.
What did she tell them?
Now, put yourself in the place of Ruth.
She had gone out of her way to help Naomi.
She cried with her.
She comforted her.
She walked with her for days on end.
And then, with Ruth standing next to her, Naomi said,
I returned empty handed.
She did not even acknowledge the presence of Ruth.
How painful must that have been for our dear Ruth?
Yet Ruth stuck with Naomi.
Likewise today, a brother of a sister of her,
because of her bitter feelings of despair,
may speak to us or treat us in a hurtful way
in spite of all our efforts to help her.
But we do not try to make it take it personally.
We stick with our sister and need and pray to Jehovah.
Please open the sister's eye,
let her see your outstretched hand.
Step number four, give practical help.
Ruth realized that Naomi's depression
prevented her from taking the initiative.
So, what did Ruth do?
Chapter 2 verse 2.
Ruth said to Naomi,
let me go out pleased to the fields
and glean among the ears of grain
behind to ever look on me with favor.
Today, we also realized that a brother in despair
may lack the energy to take any initiative to help himself.
So, loyal love for our brother moves us
to take the first step in giving him practical help
in and around his house.
Step number five, get encouragement.
Ruth badly needed encouragement
and Jehovah moved Boas to give it to her.
Look at Chapter 2 verse 12.
Boas said to Ruth,
may Jehovah reward you for what you have done
and may there be a perfect wait for you
from Jehovah the God of Israel
under whose wings you have come to seek refuge.
Now, after Ruth had been hearing
negative talk for so long,
those heartwarming words of Boas deeply touched her.
In response in the middle of her sturting,
we read that Ruth said to Boas,
you have comforted me,
and you have spoken reassuringly to your servant.
The kind and timely words of Boas
gave Ruth the strength he needed to carry on.
Today, the kind words of a caring elder
will have the same uplifting effect
on those who give their all
in helping brothers and sisters in need.
If we follow these five steps,
Jehovah may give us the privilege of being his hand.
With what result?
Consider what happened next to Naomi.
The Bible account continues by telling that Boas provided
a generous gift of food for Ruth and Naomi.
What was Naomi's reaction to Boas' generosity?
Chapter 2 verse 20.
At that Naomi said to her daughter-in-law,
may he be blessed by Jehovah
who has not failed in his loyal love
toward the living and the dead?
Now, what a turning point this was for Naomi.
Earlier, she had cried out in pain.
Jehovah caused me calamity.
But now she has claimed with joy,
Jehovah has not failed in his loyal love.
Finally, Naomi was able to connect the dots
and realized that when Ruth had said to her,
I will stick with you.
I will gleam with you.
Ruth was acting as Jehovah's hand.
And then Boas had gone far beyond
of what was required in cutting for Ruth and herself.
Boas had acted in Jehovah's hand.
Ah, now I understand Naomi must have thought.
Jehovah never left me.
He has been with me all the time.
I'm so grateful to Ruth and Boas
that they helped me to see Jehovah's supporting hands.
No doubt, all three of them rejoiced
over the decisive turning point they had reached.
In summary, what gave Ruth and Boas the strength
to pull Naomi out of her despair?
Loyal love, a strong kind of love that we give
not to people in general,
but to our brothers and sisters,
especially those who are the need.
What was the result?
Boas and Ruth had the joy of seeing
how Naomi regained her spiritual balance.
Today, we may experience the same deep joy
when we are able to help our brothers and sisters
in need to see Jehovah's hand
and thus regain their spiritual strength.
Therefore, our dear Ruth like sisters
and Boas like brothers of class 144.
It is our heartfelt prayer
that the precious education that you receive
that Gilead may help you more than ever to see
and to be Jehovah's hand.
Well, that was better than a double espresso, wasn't it?
Now we're going to have a helper
from the teaching committee to talk to us
and he has the interesting theme
be the keel K-E-E-L.
So we'll listen with interest.
Like a sailboat in the open sea,
you could be sailing along and enjoying a life,
enjoying your view,
but then suddenly and unexpectedly,
a turbulent storm,
a trial some situation could be confronting you.
That could really rock your boat.
How true are the words found in the watchtower
of March 1st, 1896 issue
where it stated,
the Christian course of self-sacrifice
cannot be one of ease
and continuous smooth sailing and peace.
There may be a calm now and then,
but storms and battles are the rule.
Now, if that was the case,
122 years ago,
maybe before all of us were alive,
how much more so is that the rule
or the case today?
Life and Satan's system is anything
but smooth sailing.
How can you students help others
endure present storms
and prepare them for future tests,
future storms?
Be the keel.
What does that mean?
The keel is a heavily weighted fin
attached to the bottom of the sailboat.
So when strong gusting winds fill the sail
and the vessel leans on its side,
the keel serves as the ballast,
the counterweight.
It provides stability.
It prevents the sailboat from blowing sideways,
from capsizing or keeling over.
Our brothers and sisters,
now more than ever,
need to be strengthened.
They need to be stabilized,
so they can face storms of anxiety,
natural disasters,
and wave after wave of ridicule and persecution.
That's the focus of Gilead School.
To strengthen and stabilize qualified men and women,
like you,
so that you in turn can strengthen and stabilize
the Hauva's organization.
Empowered with Jehovah's spirit,
you can be like those strengthening aids
in the first century,
who prove to be someone who could stabilize
their brothers and sisters.
And there are many examples,
but let's look at Acts chapter 18,
verse 24,
and let's see why the man Apollos
is someone who we want to follow.
There in Acts chapter 18,
let's read together,
verse 24.
And there it reads,
now a Jew named Apollos,
a native of Alexandria,
arrived in Ephesus,
and notice he was an eloquent man
who was well versed in the scriptures.
This man had been instructed
in the way of Jehovah,
and notice he was a glow with the spirit,
which caused him to speak
and teach accurately
about the things of Jesus.
But he was equated only with the baptism of John.
He began to speak boldly in the synagogue,
and when Priscilla and Aquila heard him,
what do they do?
They took him into their company
and explained the way of God
more accurately to him.
But what outstanding qualities Apollos had,
qualities that you students have as well.
Now Apollos had his strengths,
but like all of us,
he also had his weaknesses,
so that he needed to humbly get more help,
more understanding.
So how thankful we are,
and he was,
that Aquila and Priscilla fill in the gaps,
help him to appreciate the deeper things of Jehovah,
so he could speak more accurately.
Yes, this well-grounded,
spiritually mature couple
also helped Apollos learn life lessons,
like what?
Working as his Heam,
working in unity.
They also taught him life lessons
about going the extra mile,
helping those who needed help spiritually,
as well as materially.
What it means to be generous,
to be hospitable,
but also the key that humility is needed
in order to support others,
so we're content in our assignment.
Like Apollos,
we've got the invitation to come to Gillian
to receive extra schooling,
to have a deeper understanding
of God's word of the Bible.
And along the way,
you learn vital life lessons
from this Bethel family
who are supporting you.
You learn what it meant to go the extra mile,
to be hospitable,
to be generous, kind,
and patient.
You also learn what it means to be a giver
and not simply a taker.
And as I assume, graduate,
you will have a diploma in your hand.
Is that it?
You walk away?
That's all for your instruction?
Of course not.
We know that Jehovah promises
that he will continue
to give you instruction.
In fact, at First Peter,
chapter 5, notice verse 10.
Therein first Peter 5 verse 10,
Jehovah promises that he will
he finish your training.
It goes on to say that his continued training
will make you firm, it will make you strong,
and he will firmly ground you.
So just as a heel is filled with heavy weight
to keep the boat stable and upright,
so too Jehovah promises to give you
his powerful Holy Spirit so that you can be strengthened
and stabilized and help others to do the same,
to be firmly grounded.
Now, because the Paulus was humble
and he accepted the help,
he put himself in a position to be used
mightily by Jehovah and by his organization.
Now, what did he do to greatly help the congregations back then?
Notice Acts chapter 18 and verse 27.
There Acts 18 and verse 27,
Paulus not only helped the congregation in Achaea,
it says that he greatly helped them.
And it went on to say in another translation of this verse,
he powerfully reinforced them.
So he was really someone who took the training
and really made it happen.
In fact, if you look at verse 28,
he said an example of someone who should be
a zealous in the ministry.
He used the scriptures that he had at the time
and he used these as his authority.
And how did he speak?
Verse 28 says, with great intensity.
So we could say that basically,
a Paulus was a keel with zeal.
And we look forward to seeing how you will use
your Gilead training to greatly help others
in your assignments and doing so with great intensity.
Now, when you look at a sailboat,
what's the first thing that you normally see?
Isn't it the sail?
Why?
Because it's the most prominent, outstanding thing
on a sailboat.
Now the keel, on the other hand, is unseen.
It's below the water, below the boat, but there it is.
It's doing its job.
It's keeping that sailboat upright,
support it and stabilized.
Now, you could hardly imagine a Paulus thinking to himself,
I know that my assignment as a keel, as a support,
as a stabilizer is important,
but I don't think I'm being tapped into my true potential.
I don't think the brothers can really see me down here
doing all that I'm supposed to do.
Yes, I know that I'm not an apostle.
I'm not used to right inspired letters,
although I would be a logical choice.
If only, if only, I could have a more elevated,
a higher position, maybe like the sail.
If I was the sail, everyone could see me,
and I could get more airtime.
And then everyone could hear me and my words
that were so eloquent.
Well, we know that that's ridiculous.
He never thought that and he never acted that way
towards others.
The Bible only reveals just a fraction
of all that Apollo said and that he did.
But what we do know, that the most outstanding,
the most prominent thing about Apollo's,
was his humility.
He was willing, humble, to do anything,
be sent wherever he was sent to go.
He never allowed his strength to become weaknesses.
Likewise, much of what you, Gilead students,
will do in the future, will be unseen by others.
But you know that Jehovah sees everything you do
and all the work and a stabilizing you do
in behalf of his precious sheep.
You students have many gifts, many strengths,
many abilities, but your humility must exceed
any gifts or strengths that you have.
Never allow your strengths to become your weakness.
Remember, ability without humility is a liability.
But ability with humility is stability
and that's the key to a keel.
And no doubt when you look back at your life,
there were many that served as a keel for you.
They were the ones who stabilized you, balanced you
when you needed it most.
When you were going through turbulent storms
in your life, they were there for you.
Who was your Apollo's?
Who was your Aquila, your Priscilla?
Remember all that they said and did for you.
And remember that you can be that person for someone else.
They can help you to be balanced, stable,
even keeled.
Now it's your turn.
Take your Gilead training and greatly help
your brothers and sisters.
Love them, support them, strengthen them,
stabilize them, be the keel.
By the way, I forgot to mention
that was Ron Curson in case you didn't know.
So we appreciate that spiritual ceiling lesson.
Now at the first graduation in 1943,
there were four Gilead instructors
who gave parting words to the class.
Three of them are going to be three instructors,
not the original instructors.
Three instructors are going to be on the program today.
And so the first one is brother Jim Coffin
and he's going to speak on the subject,
pause and reset.
There are two things that I know about you
and two things that you know about me.
The first is we want to serve Jehovah
and we want to do so acceptably.
And the second is we want to be happy, would you agree?
Now to the first point, there's not much of a problem
because you've had five months of study now,
you've been through the Bible,
you know what Jehovah expects what he wants
and you're prepared to do it.
But now as to the second point,
that can be a little bit more challenging.
And why do I say that?
Well, happiness can be tricky.
We all know people that by all standards
should seem to be happy, but they're not.
On the other hand, we know people
who face many, many difficult challenges every day,
but they just seem to radiate happiness.
We quickly realize that happiness is not dependent
on things, on circumstances, or even on people.
Why is that?
It's because true happiness is not an end goal.
It is a byproduct, but a byproduct of what?
Well, the answer to that question lies back in time.
Open your Bibles if you would
to do to run me chapter 16.
And here discussing one of the three annual festivals
that Jehovah required the Israelites to attend.
In verse 15, he gave these words.
He said, seven days you will celebrate the festival
to Jehovah your God and the place that Jehovah chooses.
For Jehovah your God will bless all your produce
and all that you do.
And you will become nothing but joyful.
Now, did you notice Jehovah's words there?
You will become nothing but joyful.
You see, being joyful as a worshiper of Jehovah
was not an option.
He actually made it an act of worship.
But why?
It's because imperfect humans can lose their appreciation
for things that become a routine part of life
even if these things are a reflection
of Jehovah's loving concern.
So what was it about these festivals
who would cause all who attended them
to become nothing but joyful?
Well, each festival was to be a time
when the Israelites stopped what they were doing.
In other words, they would pause.
They would go up to Jerusalem
to reflect on the blessings that they had received
from Jehovah and that they were receiving.
In other words, they would reset.
What effect did this pause and reset have on the Israelites?
One word, gratitude.
You know what happens when we feel gratitude?
Happiness always follows.
You remember Jehovah's words,
you will become nothing but joyful.
And Jehovah knows that happiness is a byproduct of gratitude.
Now, how does this ancient example help us today?
Well, life in this old system is filled with hardships.
A head of you will be challenges,
uncertainties, time and unforeseen occurrence.
And really, that's true for all of us.
Jehovah knows this, but he also knows
that it is precisely during times of crisis
that we have the most gained by having a grateful perspective.
Gratitude reminds us that our Creator loves us
and they cares about us.
It reminds us that God's goodness exists
even in the worst that life has to offer.
Gratitude doesn't cure suffering,
but it has a power to heal.
Gratitude doesn't erase despair,
but it has the power to radiate hope.
Gratitude nullifies negativity.
The joy of Jehovah becomes our stronghold, but it's up to us.
Because gratitude is more than just a feeling
for others and sisters.
It's a mindset, it's a disposition, and it's choice.
Why do we say a choice?
It's because we can make a conscious decision
to see blessings instead of curses.
Jehovah is called the happy God
and he gives us the recipe to be happy too.
That recipe is found in part in Psalm 143.
Let's turn there.
Psalm 143, verse five,
David, the Psalmist said this.
He said, I remember the days of old.
I meditate on all your activity.
I eagerly ponder over the works of your hands.
What's the point?
The Psalmist is basically telling us
that from time to time, we have to stop
and press the pause button.
We need to take time to look around.
Jehovah has bejeweled our world
with daily reminders of his goodness, his power,
that most of all his love for us.
All we have to do is take the time to look.
We are immersed in the goodness of God.
So pause from time to time.
Take a moment to appreciate what God is giving you each day.
Contemplate the abundance and the diversity of life.
Ponder, muse, meditate on all the works of the true God.
Drink in the awesomeness of the universe on the starry night.
No two sunrises and no two sunsets are ever exactly alike.
Look up to the clouds.
What you see is ever changing.
There's nothing exactly like it before
nor will there ever be again.
The feeling you will experience is a refreshment of the soul.
It is a reset.
I see only light, ears hear only sound,
but a grateful heart perceives meaning.
We perceive that Jehovah created all these things
as a gift for us.
That's right.
Each day was to be a very special gift,
unique unto itself.
Why?
To make endless life not just special,
but amazing, wondrous, and always a joy.
Connecting with Jehovah's creation helps to discharge anxiety.
It shifts our attention to something safe,
something enduring, something outside ourselves.
It helps us to accept life's uncertainties
by reassuring us that we are part of something larger,
something everlasting, something immensely important.
Yes, we are a part of God's purpose.
Gratitude is important, not only because it helps us feel good,
but because it inspires us to do good.
A grateful spirit will make you more loving,
more forgiving, more feeling, more thoughtful.
Thankfulness is a soil in which joy thrives.
So open your hearts to the blessings around you.
Let gratefulness flow from the inside out to others.
You too will become nothing but joyful,
and that joy will show in your smile, in your eyes,
and your touch, and in your words.
Why?
Because gratitude is the ability to experience life,
not as a test, but as a gift.
It will impact every relationship that you have,
your family, your marriage, your work, even your ministry.
You'll be in a much better position
to make a real difference in the lives of others.
It will liberate you from the prison of self-preoccupation,
and it will replace a critical spirit
with a sense of appreciation.
So pause regularly to reflect on what you hope has given you.
Give the digital world a break.
Take a walk outside, and don't just look, pause and perceive.
Try to count all the blessings that you receive each day,
and you will find it easier to cope with the trials
and the stresses of life.
We are never more than one grateful thought away
from increased peace of mind and greater peace of heart.
Just remember, pause and reflect.
I think we all agree that we needed that.
We appreciate that effective presentation.
Now the second of our instructors to speak today
is Brother Mark Numer, and he's going to talk on the subject
the unsung legacy.
The word carries the thought of passing on something
of value to those that come after you.
But what is an unsung legacy?
It's a legacy that's unknown.
So if no one knows about you,
how can you pass on anything of value to them?
Can you influence others if your work is behind the scenes?
Yes, the Kenites did.
They're not included in the cloud of witnesses
at Hebrews chapter 11.
Yet the value of their faith, what they've passed on to you,
is worth meditating on.
They never enjoyed the spotlight.
Yet in Jehovah's eyes, they are so precious and unforgettable.
Let's do some digging and on earth,
the legacy of the Kenites.
And we want you to learn valuable lessons,
especially lessons that will help you search your hearts
and motives.
The first Kenite mentioned in the Bible as Jethro,
Moses' father-in-law.
When hearing that Jehovah freed the Israelites from Egypt,
notice what Jethro said here, his response
at Exodus chapter 18 and verse 11.
Jethro says,
Now I know that Jehovah is greater than all the other gods
because of what he did to those who acted arrogantly
against his people.
That's Jethro's words.
And now in verse 12,
what he did was offer up sacrifices to Jehovah God.
You see this Jethro, this Kenite,
he recognized that Jehovah God was directing the nation of Israel
and he recognized that he was to help Moses.
Jehovah God was using Moses.
Moses had been given this exhausting job of directing
some 3 million people.
So Jethro said,
How can I assist?
He wanted to support Moses' support.
So he assisted Moses to reach a God-approved solution.
Select capable trustworthy men, Moses,
and appoint them as chiefs,
over hundreds and 50s and tens and so forth.
Them, not me, don't them.
You see, Jethro was not looking for position himself.
He simply gave advice to be of support to Moses.
Why?
So that Moses could continue to do Jehovah God's work.
He wanted to be involved in helping.
He saw Jehovah's blessing on Moses.
He didn't criticize.
Jethro didn't sit back and say,
You're not even a fluent speaker.
Who do you think you are trying to manage 3 million people?
I knew you as a shepherd boy.
Back with me.
He didn't do that.
He said, I want to assist.
So the support of this can I prove to be invaluable,
not just to Moses,
but ultimately for the entire nation.
That was chosen by God.
So this is your first big lesson.
Like Jethro, look for ways to support
and to be selfless.
Don't look for position.
Positions come and go.
But your value to Jehovah God will not.
That's what Jehovah is looking for.
He loves your faithful service, not position.
And rather than criticize others, help.
Help your brothers succeed at their work.
Let them take the credit.
Drain the venom of position
and human recognition from your mind.
Jesus said,
If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing.
So prove to yourself.
Prove to Jehovah God
that you are more for the kingdom than for the glory.
That's Jethro.
But the legacy of the canites continues.
Jethro had a son.
Hobab.
Hobab was Moses' brother-in-law.
So when the time now came for the Israelites
to travel toward the promised land,
Moses requested something from Hobab.
And that's found at Numbers chapter 10.
Numbers chapter 10 and verse 31.
Now at this, Moses says to Hobab and verse 31,
Please do not leave us.
For you know where we should camp in the wilderness.
You can serve as our guide.
As a footnote says, our eyes.
You see Moses wanted Hobab to come.
Why? He was familiar with the terrain.
He knew where to find water.
He knew where to find pastures.
Hobab saw the big picture.
Hobab come with us.
Serve as our eyes.
Use your knowledge.
Use your experience.
As a scout for the nation.
We need your experience.
Hobab could have stayed home.
Why go?
I have a family of my friends.
I have a comfortable life.
Why should I throw my lot in with some three million people?
I have no idea what's going to happen to you.
But he went.
Hobab, with no apparent reward for himself,
he used his experience to guide the nation
as they traveled toward the promised land.
Now what does this mean for you?
It means something big.
During the past five months,
you were familiar with the spiritual terrain
of the 66 books of the Bible.
You've been given the big picture.
You got it from Genesis to Revelation.
History lessons, geography lessons, archaeology lessons,
lesson after lesson, day after day,
written review, after written review.
You got it.
Use your experience now.
Use that knowledge to do what?
To serve as a guide for others.
For example, when someone faces a crisis of faith,
they might find it difficult to travel this unfamiliar terrain.
It could be challenging for them.
Show them from God's Word where they can find spiritual water.
Where can they get refreshment?
Where can they get the energy?
Help them travel that terrain.
You owe it to them.
You have been given a beautiful view while being here at school
of the organization, a unique vista of God's organization
that many will never see.
You go back to your assignments and many will never experience
what you've been able to experience.
Share with them your memories, your experience,
strengthen their confidence in Jehovah God's organization.
Don't be stingy by holding your knowledge hostage.
Train too to become better than you.
Then they train too.
And then they train too.
And they train too.
Imagine if you adopt an embrace, this healthy mindset,
you will help forge a path toward a strong and unified organization.
That's your responsibility.
So now we have two generations of canites
who loyally supported Jehovah God and his people.
A legacy had begun.
Would it continue?
Well, let's jump ahead to the time of the kings.
We have First Chronicles 255,
identifies another canite named recap,
and his son was Jehonadab.
Jehonadab lived during the time period of King Jehu.
When Jehovah God commissioned Jehu to go wipe out bail worship.
And then Jehonadab comes out.
He meets Jehu.
Imagine he wants to meet him.
He wants to support Jehu.
Second Kings 10, 15.
What did Jehu say?
Jehonadab, is your heart with me?
It is.
My heart's with you.
Then get up into this chariot.
Pull them up in.
Wonderful.
Jehonadab wanted to support.
It was a privilege for Jehonadab
to come out publicly and show his loyalty
for Jehu's God-given commission of privilege.
I'm going to be with you.
When Jehonadab accepted Jehu's hand, imagine.
Step into that chariot.
He didn't get underneath.
He stood up.
He was proud to be a part of that process.
He in effect was saying,
Jehu, I'm sticking with you.
Whatever you need,
it doesn't matter what the job is.
I'm with you.
Like Jehonadab,
be determined to accept the privilege
of loyally supporting the decisions
made by God's visible organization.
Support those decisions today.
Tomorrow, next week, next month, next year,
who knows?
But you're going to be a part of this.
And it's big.
You know, from a human standpoint,
the canites had no royal lineage,
no notable accomplishments, no home,
there's no country of canite.
They're easy to miss and overlook.
Unsung as a people,
but not unseen by Jehovah.
Jehovah saw these faithful canites.
All they had done for his people
and he never forgot them.
Jehovah didn't forget them.
He loved them.
How do we know?
Well, again,
First Chronicles 255 says they are part
of the genealogy of Judah.
They're tacked on at the end.
Jehovah said, welcome to the family.
Beautiful.
First Samuel 156 shows that Jehovah protected them
when Saul was going against the Amalakites
and the canites get out of the way
because of your loyal love.
Move out of the way.
You don't get hurt.
And he rewarded them.
In Jeremiah's day,
he concluded a covenant
with Jehovah's descendants,
the recapites,
because of their enduring loyalty for decades.
Jehovah declared at Jeremiah 3519.
There will never fail to be a descendant
of Jehovah's Dab,
the son of recap,
effort to serve in my presence.
Jehovah respected the loyal endurance
of these recapites.
He promised that they would survive the destruction
of Jerusalem in 607 BCE.
There will never fail to be a descendant
in my presence.
Perhaps.
Just perhaps.
There were descendants of the canites in Jesus' time
that later became his disciples
and are in heaven right now.
He can't say for a certainty.
We don't know.
But we would not be surprised.
This is a valuable lesson for you.
If you're in a land where our work is restricted,
or an area where if you know the work you are doing,
you might feel alone without an army of support.
You're sure that Jehovah's eyes are on your enduring loyalty.
And he so deeply appreciates your faithfulness.
You see, like the canites, your work,
it might not be in the spotlight.
At times you might feel overlooked, unacknowledged,
maybe unsung by humans.
But again, never unseen by Jehovah.
And just as Jehovah did with the canites,
know that your Heavenly Father cherishes
and treasures everything you do
and will never forget your faithful service.
The canites teach us what we need to do,
what you and me, what we need to do
to be approved by Jehovah.
It's so precious.
What do we need to do?
Nothing spectacular.
Just be faithful.
It's not about fanfare.
It's silent resilience.
The legacy of the canites is now yours.
What will you do?
What will you do with it?
Be a Jethro.
Prove that you love the kingdom
and your brothers more than your position.
Be a Hobab.
Use your experience to help your brothers find refreshment
bolstering their spiritual energy
to climb those difficult terrains.
And be a Jihonadab.
Show your loyal support,
loyalty for Jehovah and his organization
by saying, I'll do whatever you need.
For however long,
the job doesn't matter.
By imitating the canites,
their example will live on in you
and their unsung loyal support
will remain unforgettable.
Well, we appreciate that.
Why is counsel very much?
What a riveting and faith strengthening program.
Before we conclude,
we'd like to share these greetings from Bulgaria.
Bulgaria is a beautiful mountainous country
and southeastern Europe.
Individual farms are still an important part of life.
Many people still vent their own wine,
can their own fruits and vegetables,
and chop their own firewood
to prepare for the cold winters.
In late 1989,
when the upheaval of communism shook Bulgaria,
there were less than 50 publishers in the entire country.
In 1991,
the first Gilead-trained missionaries were assigned there.
Today, Bulgaria has some 2,500 publishers.
Let's visit the congregation in Vratsa,
a town where houses are built right up to the steep mountain cliffs.
The dramatic rock formations, waterfalls,
and caves attract many tourists.
The Vratsa congregation has 43 publishers,
of which five serve as elders.
The publishers conduct on average 80 Bible studies each month.
Witnesses from other European countries
have moved there to help in the ministry.
The congregation has 14 regular pioneers,
two special pioneers, and two missionaries.
In the recent past, the brothers and sisters in Vratsa
could be issued a fine just for participating in the preaching work,
and some were harassed by the police.
But in October 2017,
the congregation rejoiced when a local court ruled
that limiting our preaching work is unconstitutional.
We keep our brothers and sisters in Bulgaria in our prayers.
We love them very much.
From the World Headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting.